[#](#Basic-Digital-Circuit-Lab) Basic Digital Circuit Lab
=======================

Digital Circuits is the introductory course of "ysyx", we have listed some of the knowledge points that you need to master, you not only need to know their concepts, but also need to learn to use the hardware description language to implement the circuit module respectively.

* Binary encoding of information
* Combinational Logic Design: Multiplexers, Decoders, Priority Encoders, Adders, Comparators
* Timing logic design: clocks, D-flip-flops, counters, SRAM and DRAM, finite state machines, timing analysis

#### Digital Circuit Study Materials

*   [Digital Design and Computer Architecture: RISC-V Edition](https://pages.hmc.edu/harris/ddca/ddcarv.html) ch1-5
*   [HDLBits — Verilog Practice](https://hdlbits.01xz.net/wiki/Main_Page)，recommand to read and practice in same time
*   [USTC Verilog OA](https://verilogoj.ustc.edu.cn/oj/)(Chinese, need registration and login)
*   Verilog Advanced Digital System Design Techniques and Case Studies (Chinese book name: Verilog高级数字系统设计技术与案例分析)

#### Chisel Study Materials

It is recommended to study in the following order.

1.  [Chisel Bootcamp](https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/freechipsproject/chisel-bootcamp/master) It is a very good chisel tutorial, also supports running chisel code online, you can write chisel code while learning. Among them are
    * Chapter 1 is an introduction to scala.
    * Chapter 2 is chisel basics.
    * Chapter 3 is a mix of advanced scala features and chisel.
    * Chapter 4 is about the FIRRTL backend You will need to complete the first two chapters, and we strongly recommend that you take Chapter 3. Chapter 4 is not directly related to this course and can be used as extra reading material.
2.  [Chisel Users Guide](https://www.chisel-lang.org/chisel3/docs/introduction.html)It's a good introduction to chisel, as it organizes the features of chisel in a more systematic way.
3.  [Chisel cheatsheet](https://github.com/freechipsproject/chisel-cheatsheet/releases/latest/download/chisel_cheatsheet.pdf) A concise list of common uses cases of the chisel language.
4.  [Chisel API](https://www.chisel-lang.org/api/latest/) All APIs of the chisel library are listed in detail for reference.

Then try to use Chisel to complete the above digital circuit experiments, you just need to connect the compiled Verilog code to the verilator and NVBoard.

Discord Server to be annouce

#### verilog study materials

What we need to develop is a hardware mindset, we need to have circuits in our minds before we start writing code, verilog is essentially a hardware description language rather than a hardware design language, you can look at the [Introduction to verilog (Chinese)](https://www.bilibili.com/video/BV1PS4y1s7XW) and [Verilog Syntax Introduction (Chinese)](https://vlab.ustc.edu.cn/guide/doc_verilog.html) as in introduction.

#### vscode plugins

*   If you choose chisel programming, the metals plugin is recommended!
*   If you choose verilog programming, the [digital ide](https://digital-eda.github.io/DIDE-doc-Cn/#/?id=digital-ide-version-030) plugin is recommanded

#### Completing Digital Circuit Experiments with NVBoard

We first recommend [Digital Circuits and Computer Composition Experiments](https://nju-projectn.github.io/dlco-lecture-note/index.html) from Nanjing University.

Nanjing University to carry out educational reform, "digital circuits" and "principles of computer architecture" two courses are integrated, the lab content runs through the basic digital circuits to simple processor design, and recently added the program runtime environment related content. The course is closely related to the "ysyx" project so we recommand to go through that. 

The following sections are **required lab** 

* Lab I Multiplexer
* Lab II Decoder and Encoder
* Lab III Adder and ALUs
* Lab VI Shift Registers and Barrel Shifters
* Lab VII State Machine and Keyboard Input

The rest of the content is optional as an introductory course and is not required in the pre-learning section. With NVBoard, you can use it as an FPGA to implement experiments that require FPGA support.

#### Evaluating the timing of circuits after synthesis

We provide a post-synthesis timing evaluation tool based on open source EDA toolchain. This project synthesizes an RTL design through the [open source RTL synthesizer yosys](https://yosyshq.net/yosys) and maps it to a 45nm [Open Cell Library FreePDK45](https://mflowgen.readthedocs.io/en/latest/stdlib-freepdk45.html), then it passing the synthesized netlist file and the standard cell information file into the [open source static timing analysis tool iSTA](https://github.com/OSCC-Project/iEDA/tree/master/src/operation/iSTA). iSTA will quickly evaluate the timing paths in the RTL design, and give a number of paths with the least amount of timing margins for the RTL designer's reference. In this way, the RTL designer can quickly know the timing situation of the RTL design and iterate the RTL design quickly.

You can clone the project with the following command, please read the README of the project for details.

    git clone [email protected]:OSCPU/yosys-sta.git
    
Try to evaluate your digital circuit lab with the above project.

#### Limitations of open source EDA tools

Of course, the above evaluation tool is not perfect, at least so far there are the following shortcomings: 
* open source synthesizer yosys synthesis quality is limited, according to the open source EDA team's evaluation work, for a certain RTL design, yosys synthesized standard cell area is 1.8 times that of commercial synthesizers, commercial synthesizers synthesized circuit frequency is 153.8 MHz, while yosys synthesized circuit frequency is only 52 MHz
* nangate45 is a open cell library for academic research, in which the quantity and quality of standard cells are also different from commercial libraries.
* nangate45 is not available for tape out, and no factories have used it in their production lines.

However, in the scenario of post-synthesis timing evaluation, the above shortcomings do not have a significant impact: even if yosys synthesis quality is not high, the relative difference of the synthesis results can be used to guide the direction of RTL optimization.

#### So do you need FPGAs to participate ysyx?

Basically, no need: 
* In terms of accuracy, the yosys synthesis flow is oriented towards ASIC design, and is more suitable for ysyx than the FPGA flow in terms of principle and accuracy of reporting.
* In terms of time, the main role of FPGAs is simulation acceleration, which means that if the simulation task does not take a long time to complete, the advantage of using FPGAs is not obvious. In fact, in terms of simulation flow, the advantages of FPGAs are realized when the following inequality holds.
    
        FPGA_syn_time + FPGA_impl_time + FPGA_run_time < verilator_compile_time + verilator_run_time
        
    
    `FPGA_syn_time + FPGA_impl_time` Usually on the order of hours, while `verilator_compile_time` can usually be accomplished within a few minutes, so it is only necessery to do so when `verilator_run_time` need a couple hours to finish, where the above inequality holds. However, in "ysyx" study, you are unlikely to encounter a simulation task that requires hours to complete.
*   In terms of debugging capability, FPGAs have limited debugging tools and can only capture the underlying waveform information under time and space constraints; on the other hand, software simulation is much more flexible, and we can utilize a number of software methods to enhance the debugging efficiency in various aspects.

Last Updated:

Contributors: Zihao Yu, myyerrol, Yifei Fang

[Build a verilator simulation environment](/docs/2306/prestudy/0.4.html) [Complete PA1](/docs/2306/prestudy/0.6.html)