[#](#rtfsc) RTFSC
=================

In fact, the TRM implementation is so simple that the framework code already implements it. Let's take a look at what does the digital circuits that make up the TRM looks like in NEMU's C code. For ease of description, we will refer to the computer simulated in NEMU as the "guest computer" and the program running in NEMU as the " guest program".

### [#](#Framework-code-the-first-look) Framework code the first look

The framework code is extensive and contains a lot of code that will be used in subsequent phases. As we progress, we will gradually explain all the code. Therefore, when reading the code, you only need to care about the modules that are relevant to the current progress, do not dwell on the code that is not relevant to the current progress, otherwise it will bring unnecessary fear to your mind.

    ics2023
    ├── abstract-machine   # abstract computer
    ├── am-kernels         # Applications developed based on abstract computers
    ├── fceux-am           # NES Simulator
    ├── init.sh            # Initialization Script
    ├── Makefile           # For project packaging and submission
    ├── nemu               # NEMU
    └── README.md
    

For now, we only need to be aware of the contents of the NEMU sub-project, the other sub-projects will be introduced in the future. NEMU consists of 4 modules: monitor, CPU, memory, device. We have briefly introduced the CPU and memory functions in the previous subsection, and the devices will be introduced in PA2, so we don't need to care about them now.

The monitor module was introduced to facilitate the monitoring of guest computers. In addition to interacting with GNU/Linux (e.g., reading in guest programs), it also functions as a debugger, providing a convenient way to debug NEMU. Conceptually, monitor is not a necessary part of a computer, but it is a necessary infrastructure for NEMU. Without the monitor module, debugging the NEMU would be very difficult.

The source files in the `nemu/` directory of the code are organized as follows (not all files are listed).

    nemu
    ├── configs                    # Some pre-provided configuration files
    ├── include                    # tore header files for global use
    │   ├── common.h               # Common headers
    │   ├── config                 # Configuration system-generated header file, used to maintain timestamps for 
    |   |                            configuration option updates
    │   ├── cpu
    │   │   ├── cpu.h
    │   │   ├── decode.h           # Decoding related
    │   │   ├── difftest.h
    │   │   └── ifetch.h           # Fetch related
    │   ├── debug.h                # Some macros for debugging
    │   ├── device                 # Device-related
    │   ├── difftest-def.h
    │   ├── generated
    │   │   └── autoconf.h         # Configuration system-generated header file, used to define macros based on 
    |   |                            configuration information.
    │   ├── isa.h                  # ISA-related
    │   ├── macro.h                # Some convenient macro definitions
    │   ├── memory                 # Memory access related
    │   └── utils.h
    ├── Kconfig                    # Rules for configuring information 
    ├── Makefile                   # Makefile build scripts
    ├── README.md
    ├── resource                   # Some supplementary resources
    ├── scripts                    # Makefile build scripts
    │   ├── build.mk
    │   ├── config.mk
    │   ├── git.mk                 # git version control related
    │   └── native.mk
    ├── src                        # source file
    │   ├── cpu
    │   │   └── cpu-exec.c         # Main loop for instruction execution
    │   ├── device                 # Device Related
    │   ├── engine
    │   │   └── interpreter        # Interpreter implementation
    │   ├── filelist.mk
    │   ├── isa                    # ISA-related implementations
    │   │   ├── mips32
    │   │   ├── riscv32
    │   │   ├── riscv64
    │   │   └── x86
    │   ├── memory                 # Memory Access Implementation
    │   ├── monitor
    │   │   ├── monitor.c
    │   │   └── sdb                # simple debugger
    │   │       ├── expr.c         # Expression evaluation implementation
    │   │       ├── sdb.c          # Command Processing for the Simple Debugger
    │   │       └── watchpoint.c   # Watchpoint implementation
    │   ├── nemu-main.c            # You know it....
    │   └── utils                  # Some public features
    │       ├── log.c              # Log file related
    │       ├── rand.c
    │       ├── state.c
    │       └── timer.c
    └── tools                      # Tools
        ├── fixdep                 # Dependency fixes, used in conjunction with the configuration system
        ├── gen-expr
        ├── kconfig                # Configuration system
        ├── kvm-diff
        ├── qemu-diff
        └── spike-diff
    

In order to support different ISAs, the framework code divides NEMU into two parts: the basic ISA-independent framework and the ISA-related concrete implementation. NEMU puts the ISA-related code in the `nemu/src/isa/` directory, and provides the declaration of the ISA-related APIs through `nemu/include/isa.h`. In this way, the code outside of `nemu/src/isa/` shows the basic framework of NEMU. This has two advantages.

* Helps us recognize what different ISAs have in common: no matter what kind of ISA the guest computer is, they all have the same basic framework.
* Reflects the idea of abstraction: the framework code abstracts the differences between ISAs into APIs, which are called by the base framework so that you don't have to worry about the specifics of the ISA. If you plan to choose a different ISA in the future for the second round of the PA, you'll be able to clearly appreciate the benefits of abstraction: the base framework code doesn't need to be modified at all!

[This page](/docs/ics-pa/nemu-isa-api.html) organizes the above APIs for future reference, and you don't need to fully understand what they do at this time. "Abstraction" is a very important concept in computer systems, and if you don't understand what it means now, don't worry, you'll encounter it again and again in the rest of PA.

Once you have a general understanding of the above catalog tree, you are ready to start reading code. Where to start is a no-brainer.

Do you need to talk about ####?

Well... If you don't think that's enough of a hint, here's a good one: Recall from your programming class, where does a program begin to execute?

If you don't care to answer that question, calm down. It's a question worth exploring, and you'll revisit it in the future.

### [#](#Configuration System and Project Build) Configuration System and Project Build

Before we actually start reading the code, let's briefly introduce the configuration system and project builds in the NEMU project.

#### [#](#Configuration system kconfig) Configuration system kconfig

In a project of a certain size, the number of configurable options can be very large, and there may be correlations between the options, e.g., if option A is turned on, option B must be a certain value. It is very easy for developers to manage these configuration options directly, for example, after modifying option A, they may forget to modify option B which is related to option A. The configuration system is designed to solve this problem.

The configuration system in NEMU is located in `nemu/tools/kconfig`, which is derived from the GNU/Linux project's kconfig, with a few simplifications. kconfig defines a simple language that developers can use to write "configuration files". In a configuration file, a developer can describe.

* the properties of a configuration option, including type, default value, etc.
* the relationship between different configuration options
* The hierarchy of configuration options

In the NEMU project, the name of the configuration file is `Kconfig`, e.g. `nemu/Kconfig`. When you type `make menuconfig`, the following events take place.

* Checks to see if the program `nemu/tools/kconfig/build/mconf` exists, and if it doesn't, builds `mconf`.
* Check if the program `nemu/tools/kconfig/build/conf` exists, if not, compile and generate `conf`. * Run the command `mconf nemu/kconfig/build/conf`.
* Run the command `mconf nemu/Kconfig`, then `mconf` will parse the description of `nemu/Kconfig`, and display the configuration options in the form of a menu tree for the developer to select.
* When exiting the menu, `mconf` will record the results of the developer's choices in the `nemu/.config` file.
* Run the command `conf --syncconfig nemu/Kconfig`, at which point `conf` will parse the description in `nemu/Kconfig` and read the result of the selection, `nemu/.config`, and combine the two to produce the following file.
    * Macro definitions that can be included in C code (`nemu/include/generated/autoconf.h`), where the macros have names of the form `CONFIG_xxx`.
    * Variable definitions that can be included in the Makefile (`nemu/include/config/auto.conf`).
    * Dependency rules (`nemu/include/config/auto.conf.cmd`) related to the `configuration profile` that can be included in the Makefile, so we don't have to care about it in order to read the code.
    * maintains a directory tree `nemu/include/config/` with timestamps for configuration option changes, which will be used in conjunction with another tool `nemu/tools/fixdep` to save unnecessary file compilation after updating configuration options, which we don't need to care about in order to read code

So, for now, we only need to care about the following files generated by the configuration system.

* `nemu/include/generated/autoconf.h`, used when reading C code.
* `nemu/include/config/auto.conf`, for reading the Makefile.

#### [#](#Project build and makefile) Project build and Makefile

The NEMU Makefile is a bit more complex, it has the following features.

##### [#](#Associate-with-configuration-system) Associate with configuration system

Associate makefile with the configuration system by including `nemu/include/config/auto.conf`, which associates variables generated by kconfig. Therefore the behavior of the Makefile may change after updating the configuration options via menuconfig.

##### [#](#filelist-filelist) filelist

The filelist determines which source files will be compiled. In `nemu/src` and its subdirectories there are files called `filelist.mk` which maintain the following four variables according to the menuconfig configuration.

* `SRCS-y` - a candidate set of source files to be involved in compilation
* `SRCS-BLACKLIST-y` - the set of blacklisted source files that will not participate in compilation
* `DIRS-y` - a collection of directories participating in the compilation, all files in that directory are added to `SRCS-y
* `DIRS-BLACKLIST-y` - a collection of directories that do not participate in compilation, all files in this directory will be added to `SRCS-BLACKLIST-y`

The Makefile will include all the `filelist.mk` files in the project, and base off the above four variables to filter out the source files that are in `SRCS-y` but not in `SRCS-BLACKLIST-y` as the set of source files that will eventually participate in the compilation.

The above four variables can also be associated with boolean options in the configuration result of menuconfig, e.g. `DIRS-BLACKLIST-$(CONFIG_TARGET_AM) += src/monitor/sdb`, when we select the `TARGET_AM` related boolean option in menuconfig, kconfig will eventually generate code like `CONFIG_TARGET_AM=y` in `nemu/include/config/auto.conf`, which expands the variable to `DIRS-BLACKLIST-y += src/monitor/sdb`.

when we don't select the boolean option for `TARGET_AM` in menuconfig, kconfig will generate the code in `nemu/include/config/auto.conf` as `CONFIG_TARGET_AM=n` or not defining `CONFIG_TARGET_AM` at all, then the code expands to `DIRS-BLACKLIST-n += src/monitor/sdb`, or `DIRS-BLACKLIST- += src/monitor/sdb`, neither of which affects the value of `DIRS-BLACKLIST-y`, resulting in the following effect.

    When TARGET_AM is selected in menuconfig, all files in the nemu/src/monitor/sdb directory will not be compiled.

##### [#](#compile and link) Compile and link

Makefile compilation rules are defined in `nemu/scripts/build.mk`:.

    $(OBJ_DIR)/%.o: %.c
      @echo + CC $<
      @mkdir -p $(dir $@)
      @$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c -o $@ $<
      $(call call_fixdep, $(@:.o=.d), $@)
    

The meaning of the symbols `$@` and `$<` can be found in RTFM. The call to `call_fixdep` is used to generate more meaningful dependencies, but for the time being we're mainly concerned with compiling commands, so we can ignore `call_fixdep` for now.

We can start by looking at what commands are run during the `make` process, and then work backwards to understand the values of variables such as `$(CFLAGS)`. To do this, we can type `make -nB`, which will force the `make` program to build the target in a way that "outputs commands but does not execute them". After running it, you can see a lot of things like

    gcc -O2 -MMD -Wall -Werror -I/home/user/ics2023/nemu/include
    -I/home/user/ics2023/nemu/src/engine/interpreter -I/home/use
    r/ics2023/nemu/src/isa/riscv32/include -O2 -D__GUEST_ISA__
    =riscv32 -c -o /home/user/ics2023/nemu/build/obj-riscv32-nem
    u-interpreter/src/utils/timer.o src/utils/timer.c
    

output, so you can easily understand the values of the above Makefile variables.

    $(CC) -> gcc
    $@ -> /home/user/ics2023/nemu/build/obj-riscv32-nemu-interpreter/src/utils/timer.o
    $< -> src/utils/timer.c
    $(CFLAGS) -> the rest of it
    

So you can backtrack how the value of `$(CFLAGS)` was formed based on the above output and the Makefile. Since the commands for compiling each file are similar, once you understand the compilation of one source file, you can extrapolate to the compilation of other source files. Similarly, you can understand the final linking command in the same way as above.

### [#](# Prepare first guest program) Prepare first guest program

As we already know, NEMU is a program that executes a guest program, but the guest program doesn't exist on the guest computer at first. We need to read the guest program into the guest computer, which is the responsibility of the monitor. So when NEMU starts running, it first calls the `init_monitor()` function (defined in `nemu/src/monitor/monitor.c`) to do some initialization work related to the monitor.

#### kconfig generated macros and conditional compilation

As we mentioned above, kconfig will define some macros like `CONFIG_xxx` in `nemu/include/generated/autoconf.h` according to the result of the selected configuration options, we can use these macros in C code to conditionally compile or not compile certain code. For example, when the `CONFIG_DEVICE` macro is not defined, the device-related code does not need to be compiled.

In order to write more compact code, we define macros in `nemu/include/macro.h` that are specifically designed to check macros definitions. For example, `IFDEF(CONFIG_DEVICE, init_device());` means that the `init_device()` function will be called only if `CONFIG_DEVICE` is defined, and `MUXDEF(CONFIG_TRACE, "ON", "OFF")` means that, if `CONFIG_TRACE` is defined, the result of preprocessing is `"ON"` (`"OFF"` disappears after preprocessing), otherwise the result of preprocessing is `"OFF"`.

These macros are amazing, do you know how they work?

#### Why are they all functions?

Read the code of the `init_monitor()` function, and you will see that it is all function calls. The code should behave the same if function body is expanded in `init_monitor()`. In contrast, what is the advantage of using functions here?

Let's shed some light on these initializations. `parse_args()`, `init_rand()`, `init_log()` and `init_mem()` are not very esoteric, just RTFSC.

Processing of #### arguments

The `parse_args()` calls a function you may not be familiar with, `getopt_long()`, which is used by the framework code to parse the arguments, see `man 3 getopt_long` for details on the behavior.

#### Parameter Handling

Another question is, where do the args come from?

Next monitor calls the `init_isa()` function (defined in `nemu/src/isa/$ISA/init.c`) to do some ISA-related initialization.

The first job is to read a built-in guest program into memory. In order to understand this task, we need to clarify three questions.

1. What is a guest program? We know that programs are made up of instructions, which vary from one ISA to another (imagine "hello" in a different language), so the program itself must be ISA-related. Therefore, we put the built-in guest program in `nemu/src/isa/$ISA/init.c`. The behavior of the built-in guest program is very simple, it contains only a few instructions, and it doesn't even do anything meaningful.
    
2. What is memory? We can think of memory as a contiguous piece of storage space, and since memory is byte-addressed (i.e., one memory slot holds one byte of data), it is natural to use an array of type `uint8_t` in C to model memory. NEMU provides 128MB of physical memory for the guest computer by default (see `pmem` defined in `nemu/src/memory/paddr.c`), 3.
    
3. Where in memory does the guest program need to be read into? In order for the guest computer's CPU to execute the guest program, we need a way to let the guest computer's CPU know where the guest program is located. We do this in the simplest way possible: by convention. Specifically, we have the monitor read the guest program directly into a fixed memory location `RESET_VECTOR`. The value of `RESET_VECTOR` is defined in `nemu/include/memory/paddr.h`.
    

#### BIOS and computer startup

We know that memory is a kind of RAM, a kind of volatile storage medium, which means that when the computer first starts up, the data in the memory is meaningless; whereas the BIOS is solidified in ROM/Flash, which are non-volatile storage mediums, and the contents of the BIOS will not be lost in the event of a power failure.

Therefore, in a real computer system, after the computer starts up, the computer will first hand over the control to the BIOS, the BIOS perform a series of initialization work, and then read the meaningful program from the disk into the memory to execute. The simulation of this process requires a lot of details beyond the scope of this course, which we have simplified in PA by adopting the convention that the CPU starts executing directly from the agreed upon memory location.

#### A first look at operating system startup

When you are using Windows, the boot process is usually accompanied by a boot animation, and then somehow you get to the login screen, which is obviously not enough to satisfy the CSer's curiosity. In fact, in GNU/Linux, you can easily find out what the operating system is doing behind the scenes. By typing `sudo dmesg`, you can output the operating system's boot logs, and see what the operating system is doing at a glance.

However, your current knowledge may not allow you to understand what is going on. But don't let that discourage you, as later in the PA you will be running a small operating system, Nanos-lite, on NEMU. Although Nanos-lite is a drop in the ocean compared to GNU/Linux, you will still be able to fully understand some of the key steps in the operating system booting sequence, and the door to the operating system will be open for you.

The second task of `init_isa()` is to initialize the registers, which is done by the `restart()` function. Registers are a highly structured part of the CPU, and it is natural to use the corresponding structures in C to describe the register structure of the CPU. The register structure varies from ISA to ISA, so we define the register structure `CPU_state` in `nemu/src/isa/$ISA/include/isa-def.h`, and define a global variable `cpu` in `nemu/src/cpu/cpu-exec.c`. An important part of initializing the registers is setting the initial value of `cpu.pc`, which we need to set to the memory location where we just loaded the guest program, so that the CPU can start executing the guest program from the memory location we agreed upon. For mips32 and riscv32, their register 0 always holds `0`, so we need to initialize it as well.

#### Starting address of physical memory

The physical memory of the x86 is addressed from 0, but this is not the case for some ISAs, e.g. the physical address of the mips32 and riscv32 starts at `0x80000000`. So for mips32 and riscv32, their `CONFIG_MBASE` will be defined as `0x80000000`. When the CPU accesses memory in the future, we will map the memory address that the CPU will access to the corresponding offset in `pmem`, which is realized by the `guest_to_host()` function in `nemu/src/memory/paddr.c`. For example if the mips32 CPU intends to access memory address `0x80000000`, we'll make it end up accessing `pmem[0]` so that it can correctly access the first instruction of the guest program. This mechanism has a special name, address mapping, and we'll encounter it again in subsequent PAs.

For x86, we take the implementation of the register structure as a homework assignment. To check that your implementation is correct, we also call the `reg_test()` function (defined in `nemu/src/isa/x86/reg.c`) in `init_isa()`. The details are described in the mandatory questions below.

After Monitor reads in the guest program and initializes the registers, the memory layout is as follows.

    pmem:
    
    CONFIG_MBASE      RESET_VECTOR
          |                 |
          v                 v
          -----------------------------------------------
          |                 |                  |
          |                 |    guest prog    |
          |                 |                  |
          -----------------------------------------------
                            ^
                            |
                           pc
    

NEMU returns to the `init_monitor()` function, and proceeds to call the `load_img()` function (defined in `nemu/src/monitor/monitor.c`). This function reads a meaningful guest program from [disk image](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disk_image) into memory, overwriting the built-in guest program that was just there. This disk image file is an optional parameter for running NEMU, and is specified in the command to run NEMU. If this parameter is not given when running NEMU, NEMU will run the built-in guest program.

The rest of the initialization of monitor will be described in the following labs, but for now you don't need to worry about their details, finally monitor will call the `welcome()` function to output the welcome message. Now you can compile and run NEMU in the `nemu/` directory: make run

    make run
    

#### Implementing Register Structures for x86

If you chose x86, the framework code does not correctly implement the structure `x86_CPU_state` which is used to emulate the x86 registers, now you need to implement it (the structure is defined in `nemu/src/isa/x86/include/isa-def.h`). The `reg_test()` function called in `init_isa()` generates some random data to test the implementation of the register structure. If the implementation is incorrect, an assertion fail will be triggered. When the implementation is correct, NEMU will not trigger an assertion fail, but will output the welcome message mentioned above. If you have chosen an ISA other than x86, you can ignore this question.

The x86 register structure is as follows.

     31 23 15 7 0
    + -----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
    | EAX AH AX AL |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | EDX DH DX DL |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | ECX CH CX CL |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | ebx bh bx bl |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|| EBP BP
    | EBP BP |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | ESI SI |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | EDI DI |
    |-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------|
    | ESP SP |
    +-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+-----------------+
    

where

* `EAX`, `EDX`, `ECX`, `EBX`, `EBP`, `ESI`, `EDI`, `ESP` are 32-bit registers.
* `AX`, `DX`, `CX`, `BX`, `BP`, `SI`, `DI`, `SP` are 16-bit registers.
* `AL`, `DL`, `CL`, `BL`, `AH`, `DH`, `CH`, `BH` are 8-bit registers.

But they are not physically independent of each other, for example, the lower 16 bits of `EAX` are `AX`, and `AX` is divided into `AH` and `AL`. This structure is sometimes convenient when dealing with data of different lengths. For more details on x86 registers, see RTFM.

Hint: Using anonymous unions.

#### What is an anonymous union?

It's normal for you to have this question, but you should realize that it's time to STFW.

#### How does reg\\\_test() test your implementation?

Read the code for `reg_test()`, and think about what the `assert()` condition in the code is written against.

After running NEMU you should see the appropriate welcome message, and the ISA of your choice. Be sure to make sure that the output ISA information matches the ISA of your choice. However, you will see the following error message.

    [src/monitor/monitor.c:20 welcome] Exercise: Please remove me in the source code and compile NEMU again.
    riscv32-nemu-interpreter: src/monitor/monitor.c:21: welcome: Assertion `0' failed.
    

In fact, we've already covered this error at the end of PA0. As an exercise, you need to backtrack to the code that reported the error based on the error message, and then remove the corresponding code. After removing it and recompiling NEMU, you will see that the error no longer occurs.

### [#](# Run the first guest program) Run the first guest program

After Monitor's initialization, the `main()` function will continue to call the `engine_start()` function (defined in `nemu/src/engine/interpreter/init.c`). The code enters the Simple Debugger's main loop `sdb_mainloop()` (defined in `nemu/src/monitor/sdb/sdb.c`), and outputs the NEMU command prompt.

    (nemu)
    

Simple debugger is the core feature of monitor, we can enter commands in the command prompt, to monitor and debug the operation status of the guest computer. The framework code already implements a few simple commands, which are very similar to GDB.

After typing `c` at the command prompt, NEMU enters the main loop `cpu_exec()` (defined in `nemu/src/cpu/cpu-exec.c`). `cpu_exec()` in turn calls `execute()`, which simulates the way the CPU works: executing instructions over and over again. Specifically, the code calls the `exec_once()` function in a for loop, which does what we described in the previous chapter: it tells the CPU to execute an instruction pointed to by the current PC, and then update the PC.

How long does #### take?

In the `cmd_c()` function, `cpu_exec()` is called with the argument `-1`, do you know what this means?

#### Potential Threats (recommended for 2nd week thinking)

"The call to `cpu_exec()` was passed with the argument `-1`", is this undefined behavior? Check the C99 manual to confirm your idea.

Different ISAs have different instruction formats and meanings, so the code that executes the instructions is naturally ISA-related. This code is located in `nemu/src/isa/$ISA/inst.c`. There are a lot of details about the execution of the instructions that you don't need to worry about at the moment, but we will explain them in PA2.

Since we ran NEMU without a guest program image, NEMU will run the built-in guest program mentioned above. NEMU will keep executing commands until one of the following conditions is encountered, then it will exit the command execution loop.

* The required number of cycles has been reached.
* The guest program executes the `nemu_trap` instruction. This is a fictitious special instruction that was added to NEMU to allow the guest program to indicate the end of execution. NEMU has selected a number of instructions for debugging purposes in the ISA manual and given them the special meaning of `nemu_trap`. For example, in the riscv32 manual, NEMU chose the `ebreak` instruction to act as `nemu_trap`. The `nemu_trap` instruction also receives an argument indicating the end state of the guest program in order to indicate whether the guest program has ended successfully or not. After the guest program executes this instruction, NEMU will set the end state of NEMU according to this end state parameter, and output different end messages according to different states, mainly including
    * `HIT GOOD TRAP` - the guest program ends execution correctly.
    * `HIT BAD TRAP` - the guest program ended execution incorrectly.
    * `ABORT` - the guest program terminated unexpectedly, and did not finishs its execution

When you see NEMU output something like the following (pc output values will vary from ISA to ISA).

    nemu: HIT GOOD TRAP at pc = 0x8000000c
    

The guest program has successfully ended its run. NEMU prints the number of instructions executed and the time spent at the end of the `cpu_exec()` function, and calculates the frequency of instruction execution. However, since the built-in guest program is so small and the execution ends so quickly, it is not possible to compute a meaningful frequency at this time. In the future, the frequency output here can be used as a rough measure of NEMU's performance when running some complex programs.

After exiting `cpu_exec()`, NEMU will return to `sdb_mainloop()`, waiting for the user to enter commands. But in order to run the program again, you need to type `q` to exit NEMU, and then run it again.

#### Who indicates the end of a program?

You were told in your programming class that a program exits when it gets to the point where the `main()` function returns, and you believed it. But have you ever wondered why program execution ends at the return of the `main()` function? If someone tells you that the teacher in your programming class is wrong, do you have a way to prove/disprove it? If you are interested in this, please search the internet.

#### Let's just finish what we started (recommended to think about it in 2 weeks)

What is the beginning of a program on GNU/Linux? What is the end of a program on GNU/Linux? What is the answer for a program running in NEMU?

Related questions: Why do we need `nemu_trap` in NEMU? Why do we need a monitor?

Finally, let's talk about some noteworthy aspects of the code.

* Three macros useful for debugging (defined in `nemu/include/debug.h`).
    * `Log()` is an updated version of `printf()`, designed to output debugging information, as well as the source file, line number, and function where `Log()` was used. When too much debugging information in output, it is easy to locate the relevant place in the code.
    * `Assert()` is an updated version of `assert()` that outputs some information before the assertion fails when the test condition is false.
    * `panic()` is used to output information and end the program, equivalent to an unconditional assertion fail.

Examples of using these three macros are given in the code, if you don't know how to use them, RTFSC.

* Memory is simulated by the large array `pmem` defined in `nemu/src/memory/paddr.c`. The simulated memory is always accessed by `vaddr_read()` and `vaddr_write()` (defined in `nemu/src/memory/paddr.c`) while the guest program is running. vaddr, paddr represent virtual and physical addresses respectively. These concepts will be used in the future, so there's no need to go into them now, but keeping the interfaces consistent from now on will avoid some unnecessary trouble in the future.

#### Understanding Framework Code

You need to understand the NEMU framework code in conjunction with the above chapter.

If you don't know what considered "understand the framework code", you can try the following tasks first. If you find that you don't know how to do it, come back and read this page more carefully. Understanding the framework code is a spiral process, with different focuses at different stages. You don't need to get frustrated because you don't understand some details, and you shouldn't try to understand all the code at once.

#### RTFSC ! = Staring at the code

It is likely that this is the first time you have worked on a project with so many source files, and looking at the code can be very confusing: you don't know in which file a function is defined, you don't understand what a function does, you don't know exactly how a piece of code behaves... At the same time, you are probably looking at the code in the same primitive way you used to look at it: with your eyes. You keep looking at it for a while, and you realize that you're not getting anywhere, so you start to get frustrated...

For projects with only one or two source files and a few hundred lines of code, direct RTFSC can be effective. But if there are more source files, more code, you will soon find that this approach is very inefficient, this is because the short-term memory of the human brain is very limited, even static code can not be completely remembered, not to mention the dynamic behavior of the program is a huge state machine, your brain can only simulate a very small portion of the state machine in a period of time.

Is there a tool that can help you simulate this huge state machine? This is where one of the tools we mentioned in PA0 comes in handy, GDB. In GDB, we can make the program execute one instruction at a time through single-step execution, which is equivalent to letting the state machine move forward one step at a time, so that we can observe the state of the program at any moment! And the state machine's path is the actual order of execution of the program, so you can understand the behavior of the program as you run it. This is good for pointer-related code, especially function pointers, because you can't tell from the static code which function the pointer is pointing to when the program is running.

GDB also comes with a simple interface called TUI. After running GDB in a tall window, you can switch to the TUI by typing `layout split`, which allows you to see the program's behavior from both the source code and the command perspective. However, in order to see the source code, you will need to add GDB debugging information to the NEMU build, as described in the box below. If you want to learn more about TUI, STFW.

In order to help you RTFSC more efficiently, you'd better know more about GDB commands and operations through RTFM and STFW, such as.

* Single-step into the function you are interested in.
* Single-step to skip functions you are not interested in (e.g. library functions).
* Run to the end of a function
* Print the value of a variable or register
* Scanning memory
* View the call stack
* Set breakpoints
* Setting watchpoints

If you haven't used GDB before, and then skipped GDB-related stuff in PA0, now you're going to suffer from laziness.

#### Adding GDB debugging information for NEMU compilation

The menuconfig option is already there for you, you just need to open it.

    Build Options
      [*] Enable debug information
    

Then clear the compilation and recompile. Try to read the code and understand what happens when you turn on the above menuconfig options to build NEMU.

#### exit gracefully

As a test to see if you understand the framework code, let's set up an exercise for you: if you type `q` to exit after running NEMU, you will see some error messages in your terminal. Please analyze what causes this error message and try to fix it in NEMU.

### [#](# It's that simple) It's that simple!

In fact, the implementation of TRM is already covered in the above introduction.

* The memory is a large array defined in `nemu/src/memory/paddr.c`.
* PCs and general-purpose registers are defined in structures in `nemu/src/isa/$ISA/include/isa-def.h` * Adders are defined in...
* The adder is defined in... Well, this part of the framework code is a bit complicated, but it doesn't affect our understanding of TRM, so let's go over it in PA2!
* The way TRM works is represented by `cpu_exec()` and `exec_once()`.

In NEMU, we only need some very basic knowledge of C to understand how the simplest computers work, thanks to the pioneers!

[The groundbreaking chapter](/docs/ics-pa/1.2.html) [Infrastructure: Simple Debugger](/docs/ics-pa/1.4.html)
*** Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version) ***
