[#](#Monitoring Points) Monitoring Points
=============

Watchpoints are used to monitor when the value of an expression changes. If you've never used watchpoints before, try them out in GDB.

### [#](#Extend expression evaluation functionality) Extending expression evaluation functionality

You've already implemented arithmetic expressions, but these expressions are composed of constants and their values don't change. Such expressions do not make sense in a watchpoint, so in order to utilize the watchpoint's functionality, you first need to extend the expression evaluation functionality.

Let's use BNF to illustrate what we need to extend: <expr> ::=<expression>.

    <expr> ::= <decimal-number
      | <hexadecimal-number> # Starts with "0x".
      | <reg_name> # Starts with "$".
      | "(" <expr> ")"
      | <expr> "+" <expr>
      | <expr> "-" <expr>
      | <expr> "*" <expr>
      | <expr> "/" <expr>
      | <expr> "==" <expr>
      | <expr> "! =" <expr>
      | <expr> "&&" <expr>
      | "*" <expr> # Pointer dereferencing
    

Their function is the same as that of C operators, including precedence and combinability; if in doubt, consult the documentation.

Regarding getting the value of a register, this is obviously an ISA-related function. The framework code has prepared the following API.

    // nemu/src/isa/$ISA/reg.c
    word_t isa_reg_str2val(const char *s, bool *success);
    

It is used to return the value of the register named `s` and set `success` to indicate success.

Another thing to note is the recognition of pointer dereferences. When doing lexical analysis, there is no way to distinguish multiplication from pointer dereferences, because they are both `*`. We need to distinguish them before recursively evaluating them, otherwise if we treat pointer dereferences as multiplications, the evaluation process will consider the expression to be illegal. It's not that hard to tell them apart, given an expression, you can tell them apart. In fact, by looking at the type of the token before the `*`, we can decide whether the `*` is a multiplication or a pointer dereference, don't you think? Here's the framework for the `expr()` function.

    if (!make_token(e)) {
      *success = false;
      return 0;
    }
    
    /* TODO: Implement code to evaluate the expression. */
    
    for (i = 0; i < nr_token; i ++) {
      if (tokens[i].type == '*' && (i == 0 || tokens[i - 1].type == certain type) ) {
        tokens[i].type = DEREF;
      }
    }
    
    return eval(?, ?);
    

The `certain type` is up to you to figure out! In fact, the above framework can also handle negative numbers, so if you've implemented negative numbers before, you should have no trouble recognizing `*`.

In addition, we've simplified the expressions in the simple debugger compared to the expressions in GDB, which are not type-specific, so we need to make two extra points: * All results are `uu'.

* All results are of type `uint32_t`.
* Pointers also have no type, and for pointer dereferencing, we always read an integer of type `uint32_t` from the client computer's memory.

#### Extending expression evaluation

You need to implement the functions listed in the above BNF. The above BNF does not list all the operators in C, such as the various bitwise operations, `<=` and so on. `==` and `&&` are likely to be used when using watchpoints, so you are required to implement them. If in the future you find it inconvenient to use a watchpoint without one of these operators, consider implementing it again.

#### Expression evaluation in riscv64

Since riscv64 is a 64-bit ISA, you need to interpret the result of an expression as a `uint64_t` type.

Limitations of the #### test

We have previously implemented an expression generator, but after adding register usage and pointer dereferencing to expression evaluation, the expression generator doesn't meet all of our needs. This is because the semantics of registers do not exist in C programs, and the semantics of pointer dereferencing are very different from NEMU.

The point here is that testing has its limitations, and no single technique can solve all problems once and for all. This is especially true of cutting-edge research: they often solve only a small part of the problem. Still, this expression generator gives you a lot of confidence that there is value in thinking about how you can easily test, even partially.

### [#](#Implementing Watchpoints) Implementing Watchpoints

The simple debugger allows the user to set and delete watchpoints at the same time, so it is best to use a chained list to organize the information about the watchpoints. The watchpoint structure is defined in the framework code (in `nemu/src/monitor/sdb/watchpoint.c`).

    typedef struct watchpoint {
      int NO.
      struct watchpoint *next;
    
      /* TODO: Add more members if necessary */
    
    } WP.
    

But there are only two members defined in the structure: `NO` for the watchpoint's serial number, and `next`. In order to realize the functionality of watchpoints, you need to add the necessary members to the structure according to your understanding of how watchpoints work. We also use a "pool" data structure to manage the watchpoint structure, which is partially described in the framework code: static WP_pool

    static WP wp_pool[NR_WP] = {};
    static WP *head = NULL, *free_ = NULL;
    

The code defines a pool of watchpoint structures, `wp_pool`, and two linked tables, `head` and `free_`, where `head` is used to organize watchpoint structures in use, `free_` is used to organize free watchpoint structures, and the `init_wp_pool()` function initializes the two linked tables.

#### Implementing Watchpoint Pool Management

In order to use the watchpoint pool, you need to write the following two functions (you can modify the parameters and return values of the functions according to your needs).

    WP* new_wp(); void free_wp(WP)
    void free_wp(WP *wp).
    

Where `new_wp()` returns a free watchpoint structure from the `free_` chain, and `free_wp()` returns `wp` to the `free_` chain, these two functions will be called by other functions as interfaces to the watchpoint pool. Note that when calling `new_wp()` there may be no free watchpoint structure, for simplicity you can terminate the program immediately with `assert(0)`. The framework code defines 32 watchpoint structures, which should be sufficient for general use. If you need more watchpoint structures, you can change the value of the `NR_WP` macro.

Both of these functions perform some insertion and deletion operations, so for those of you who are not familiar with chaining, this can be used as an exercise in chaining.

#### Warm Up

The framework code uses the keyword `static` when defining variables such as `wp_pool`, what does `static` mean in this context? Why is it used here?

Once you have implemented the watchpoint pool, you can think about how to implement the watchpoint functionality. Specifically, you need to implement the following functionality.

* When the user gives an expression to be watched, you need to request a free watchpoint structure via `new_wp()` and record the expression. All watchpoints are then scanned at the end of the `trace_and_difftest()` function (defined in `nemu/src/cpu/cpu-exec.c`), which is called every time the `cpu_exec()` loop finishes executing an instruction. During the scanning of the watchpoints, you need to evaluate the corresponding expressions of the watchpoints (you have already implemented the expression evaluation function) and compare their values to see if they have changed, if they have changed, the program will pause due to the triggering of the watchpoints, and you will need to set the `nemu_state.state` variable to `NEMU_STOP` to achieve the effect of the pause. You need to set the `nemu_state.state` variable to `NEMU_STOP` to pause. Finally, you output a message that the user has triggered a watchpoint, and return to the `sdb_mainloop()` loop to wait for the user's command.
* Use the `info w` command to print information about the watchpoints in use. You can refer to the `info watchpoints` run in GDB for information on what to print.
* Use the `d` command to delete watchpoints, you just need to free the watchpoint structure.

#### Implementing watchpoints

You will need to implement the watchpoint-related functionality described above. Once you have implemented expression evaluation, the focus of the watchpoint implementation will be on chained table operations.

Since watchpoints need to be checked in every loop of `cpu_exec()`, this can be a significant performance overhead for the NEMU. We can put the watchpoint checking in `trace_and_difftest()` and wrap the watchpoint checking code in a new macro `CONFIG_WATCHPOINT`; then we can add a switch to watchpoints in `nemu/Kconfig`, and then turn on the switch via menuconfig to activate the watchpoints. Then turn it on via menuconfig to activate the watchpoints. When you don't need to use the watchpoint, you can turn off the switch in menuconfig to improve the performance of NEMU.

It is also possible to trigger more than two watchpoints at the same time, you are free to decide how to handle these special cases, we don't have a hard and fast rule about this.

[#](# Debugging Tools and Principles) Debugging Tools and Principles
---------------------

In the course of implementing a watchpoint, you are likely to encounter segmentation errors. If you feel helpless, you should read this chapter.

Let's take a quick look at why segmentation errors occur. First, the machine is always right. If something goes wrong in your program, first suspect a bug in your code. For example, if you inadvertently write something like `if (p = NULL)`. For example, if you inadvertently write something like `if (p = NULL)`, but when you execute that line of code, all that happens is that `p` is assigned the value `NULL`, and the program goes on. However, it is only when a future dereference is made to `p` that a segment error is triggered and the program crashes.

We can abstract some software engineering related concepts from the above example: * Fault: code that implements a bug.

* Fault: code that is implemented incorrectly, e.g. `if (p = NULL)`
* Error: A state of the program that is not expected when it is executed, e.g. `p` is incorrectly assigned to `NULL`.
* Failure: A directly observable error, such as a program triggering a segment error.

Debugging is actually a process of backtracking from the observed failure to the fault, and after finding the fault, we quickly know how to modify the wrong code. But as you can see from the above example, debugging is not easy precisely because.

* fault does not necessarily trigger an error
* an error does not necessarily turn into an observable failure immediately after it is triggered
* error will be like a snowball in general more and more, when we observe the failure, in fact, has been very far from fault

Understanding these reasons, we can formulate the appropriate strategy: * As far as possible to turn faults into observable failures.

* as much as possible to turn a fault into an error. This is actually what tests do, so we added the expression generator in the previous section to help you test, and later experiments will also provide a wealth of test cases. However, it's not always possible to turn every fault into an error, as this depends on the coverage of the tests. Designing a set of full-coverage tests is not a simple task, and the more complex the system, the more difficult it is to design full-coverage tests. However, how to improve the coverage of tests is an ongoing academic concern.
*** Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version) ***



#### How would you test your Watchpoint implementation?

We don't provide tests for watchpoints, so think about it, how would you test it?

Of course, for experimentation, testing as you go is a reasonable approach, depending on your confidence in your code.

* Recognize error as early as possible. The timing of the error determines how easy it is to debug: if you wait until a failure occurs before you realize the error exists, debugging can be difficult; if you can detect the error when it first occurs, debugging can be much less difficult. In fact, you've already seen some useful tools: * `-Wall`, `Wall`, and `Wall`.
    * `-Wall`, `-Werror`: turn potential faults into failures at compile time. These tools are limited in their usefulness, and can only look for faults that look suspicious even at compile time, such as `if (p = NULL)`. However, as the compiler version is enhanced, the compiler can also find some [undefined behavior open in new window](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undefined_behavior) in the code. It's a free lunch, so it's a waste if you don't take it.
    * `assert()`: turn an error into a failure at runtime. `assert()` is a simple but very powerful tool, as long as you define the characteristics that your program should satisfy, you will be able to intercept any error that doesn't satisfy those characteristics at runtime. For example, in the case of a chained table implementation, all we need to do is insert some simple `assert()` into the code (e.g., pointer dereferencing is not null), and we can virtually eliminate segmentation errors. However, writing these `assert()`s requires some knowledge of the program's behavior, and `assert()`s are of limited use when the program's features are not easily expressed.
    * `printf()`: Observe potential errors in the output. This is the most common tool for backtracking through a fault, to see if a variable in the program has entered an incorrect state. In NEMU we provide the macro `Log()` for outputting more debugging information, which actually encapsulates the functionality of `printf()`. However, since `printf()` requires a manual judgment of whether the output is correct or not, it is less convenient than the automatic judgment of `assert()`.
    * GDB: Observe any state of the program, anytime, anywhere. Debuggers are the most powerful tools, but they are also the most expensive to use because you need to watch for suspicious state in a sea of program behavior.

#### Powerful GDB

If you encounter a segmentation error, you'll probably want to know what line of code triggered it. Try writing a program that triggers a segmentation error, and then running it in GDB. Have you found that GDB can provide you with useful information?

#### sanitizer - an underlying assert

Segment errors are usually caused by illegal accesses, and a simple idea is that if we could check for out-of-bounds addresses with `assert()` before each access, we could catch segment errors before they occur!

Although we only need to focus on pointer and array accesses, there's a lot of code in the project like this, and it would be a pain in the ass to manually add `assert()` before these accesses. In fact, the compiler is in the best position to do this, since it knows where all the pointer and array accesses are. What makes the compiler support this is a tool called `Address Sanitizer`, which automatically inserts code to check for out-of-bounds before pointers and arrays are accessed. GCC provides a `-fsanitize=address` compilation option to enable this. Menuconfig has the option ready for you, just turn it on: `-fsanitize=address`.

    Build Options
      [*] Enable address sanitizer
    

Then clear the compilation and recompile.

You can try to trigger a segmentation error on purpose, and then read the Address Sanitizer error message. You may find that your program's performance is degraded because of the additional performance overhead of checking each access. But as a tool to help you diagnose bugs, it's worth the price, and you can still turn it off when you don't need to debug.

In fact, in addition to address out-of-bounds errors, Address Sanitizer also checks for use-after-free errors (i.e., "continue to use after freeing space claimed from the heap" errors), and do you know how it does this?

#### More sanitizers

In fact, GCC supports many more sanitizers that can check for different kinds of errors, you can check the `-fsanitize` option in `man gcc`. If your program works correctly with the various sanitizers on, it is a good sign that your program is of some quality.

Based on the above analysis, we can summarize some debugging suggestions: * Always use `-Wall`.

* Always use `-Wall` and `-Werror`.
* Insert `assert()` into your code as often as possible.
* Enable sanitizer when debugging
* When `assert()` fails to catch an error, output the suspect variable via `printf()`, expecting to observe the error.
* When `printf()` doesn't easily detect an error, use GDB to understand the exact behavior of the program.

If you've heard any of these suggestions in your programming classes, you're likely to encounter very few runtime errors.

[#](#Breakpoints) Breakpoints
-----------

The function of a breakpoint is to pause the program so that you can see what the state of the program is at a given moment. In fact, it is easy to simulate a breakpoint with a watchpoint: w

    w $pc == ADDR
    

where `ADDR` is the address of the breakpoint. This way the program will pause when it reaches the `ADDR` position.

#### How to make breakpoints more efficient (recommended to think about in the second week)

If you use breakpoints when running larger programs (such as microbench), you may find that setting breakpoints significantly reduces the efficiency of NEMU's program execution. Think about why this is the case. Is there any way to solve this problem?

The way the debugger works with breakpoints is very different from the way it simulates breakpoints by monitoring them. In fact, the way breakpoints work, is the 36 Stratagems of Stealing the Dragon and Turning the Phoenix! If you want to unravel this mystery, you can read [this article open in new window](http://eli.thegreenplace.net/2011/01/27/how-debuggers-work-part-2-breakpoints). Once you understand how breakpoints work, try to think about the following two questions.
*** Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version) ***



#### Can't be long at all?

The x86 `int3` instruction does not have any operands, the opcode is 1 byte, so the length of the instruction is 1 byte. Is this necessary? Suppose there is a variant of the x86 architecture, my-x86, which is the same as x86 except that the length of the `int3` instruction becomes 2 bytes. In my-x86, would the breakpoint mechanism in the above article still work? Why?

#### Breakpoints at will

What happens if you set a breakpoint in a non-first byte (middle or end) of an instruction? You can try it in GDB, then think about it and explain why.

#### NEMU's Past and Present

You already know a little bit about how NEMU works. In fact, before NEMU was born, NEMU was not called NEMU for a while, but was called NDB (NJU Debugger), and for some reason it was renamed to NEMU. If you want to know this prehistoric secret, the first thing you need to know is this: what is the difference between an Emulator and a Debugger? What is the difference between an Emulator and a Debugger? More specifically, how does GDB debug a program compared to NEMU?

[Expression evaluation](/docs/ics-pa/1.5.html) [How to read the manual](/docs/ics-pa/1.7.html)
